let us take another recursive algorithm and find its
time complexity using recursion tree and back substitution method
Let us write the recurrence relation for this algorithm first.
First assume this algorithm takes T(n) time
We having If condition, it will take one unit time
and then we have a for loop from i equal to
zero till n and each time i is multiplied by two
AS we have already discussed
If the iterating variable in the loop gets multiplied
by two or gets divided by two every time the
time complexity is logn
So this for loop will take logn + 1
time and the print statement inside will take
logn time
Then the algorithm is called recursively
for n-1
So it will take T(n-1) time
So the total time T(n) equal to
T(n-1) + logn + logn + 1
that is
T(n-1) + 2logn + 2 and we know
2logn + 2 is asymptotically equal to
logn so we can write T(n) equal
to T(n-1) + logn so with
initial conditions we have T(n) equal to one
when n=0 and T(n) equal to
T(n-1) + logn  when n is
greater than zero. So let us solve this recurrence relation with
recursion tree method. First write T(n)
So what will T(n) do if
n>0 It will print logn times and
call itself with n-1 So write logn
and  T(n-1) here again T(n-1)
is a recursive call. So it will take
Log(n-1) unit of time and call itself with
n-1 So now the of n-2 is
a recursive call
So it will take log(n-2) time and
call itself with n-3
This recursive tree will grow similarly and reach
T(2) which takes log2 time and call T(1)
T(1) will take log1 Time and
call of T(0)
Now T(0) wont make any further recursive call
as n equal to 0 So this is the recursion
tree for the given algorithm
Now let us mark the total time taken at each
level for this tree
At first level logn time will be taken
then in next level
log(n-1)
Time will be taken
Then log(n-2) then
Log(n-3)
Up to log2, log1 and 0
Now let us calculate the total time complexity T(n) equal to
0 + log1 + log2 + etcetera
+ log(n-3)
+ log(n-2)
+ log(n-1) + logn
We know
Log(ab) equal to loga + logb
So we can write T(n) equal to
log(1*2*3* upto n)
And it is nothing but n!
So we got T(n) equal to logn!
here we got T(n) equal
to logn!
But there is not time bound for logn!
So in this case we can write
the upper bound of logn!
for n! the upper bound
is n^n hence the upper band of logn!
is logn^n so logn!
becomes logn^n which is
big Oh of nlogn. Thats it. time
taken by this algorithm is O(nlogn).
Now, let us solve it using the back substitution method here the
recurrence relation is T(n) equal to
T(n-1) + logn
So what will be T(n-1). It will
be T(n-2) + log(n-1)
So in this equation instead of T(n-1)
write T(n-2) + log(n-1)
So we will get
T(n-2) + log(n-1) + logn
And now what will be T(n-2)
It will be T(n-3)
+ log(n-2)
So we will get T(n) equal to
T(n-3) + log(n-2)
+ log(n-1)
+ logn
Similarly if we back substitute for K times we will
get T(n) equal to T(n-k)
+ log(n-(k-1)) + log(n-(k-2))
+ etcetera
+ log(n-2)
+ log(n-1) +logn
As we discussed previously
At some point n-k will become 0 which
means K = n so we can substitute n
for k and we will get T(n-n) +
log(n-n+1) + log(n-n+2) +
etcetera
+ log(n-2)
+ log(n-1) + logn
That is T(0) + log1 + log2
+ etc + log(n-1)
+ logn
That is 1 +
log(1*2*3* upto n)
that is 1 + logn!
So what will be the time taken here as we
have already discussed it will be O(nlogn) time.